Neuroplasticity and Growth Mindset

Learning Competencies
By the end of this exploration, you should be able to: 
Describe how neuroplasticity is relevant to learning
Describe what Growth Mindset is and why it is important

Summary

Until recently, the conventional thinking was that our brains were hardwired at birth and therefore unchangeable. In actuality, our brains are like malleable plastic that is constantly being reshaped by our daily experiences. 

Science has also revealed that our beliefs about ourselves, what we think and feel about our abilities and our beliefs about ‘success’ and ‘failure’ hugely influence our outcomes. 

In this exploration, I will be challenged to think about how neuroplasticity and Growth Mindset will boost my capabilities in learning.

Explore Neuroplasticity

Bio Neuroplasticity and Learning https://youtu.be/6Ngs5_WXxfo 
Using imagination/mental practise 
The neuron pathways responsible for movement instruction were still being used and strengthened resulting in increased strength when the muscles actually contract 
Mental practise is an effective way to prepare for a physical skill 
Thoughts change the structure and function of the brain by affecting neurons at their base level 
Practise combining physical work with imagination/mental visualisation

**comparison: rewiring a computer to function differently; personal: neuroplasticity and chronic pain - rewiring my brain to feel pain as I am supposed to after years of my brain being hardwired to increase/exacerbate pain and to feel extra sensitive** 

Neuroplasticity is the ability of the brain to change and grow throughout one's life. It is responsible for the changes that take place when learning to play a musical instrument, speaking a new language, recovering from an injury, as well as creating new ways of functioning and new behaviours/habits for those with behavioural and mental disabilities. 

Your Brain on Learning 

Neuroplasticity = selective organising of connections between neurons in our brains 
(Judy Willis) Basically, when an activity is practiced (or a memory recalled) on a regular basis, the neural networks (electrochemical pathways) shape themselves according to that activity or memory. If practicing new things stops, the brain goes through a “pruning”, eventually eliminating that pathway. “Like in a system of freeways connecting various cities, the more cars going to certain destination, the wider the road that carries them needs to be. The fewer cars travelling that way, however, the fewer lanes are needed.” 

“Cells that fire together, wire together”
Performing tasks, or recalling information that causes different neurons to work simultaneously, strengthens those connections. This then creates “thick, hardy road maps” linking various parts of the brain. Stimulating one neuron will more than likely trigger the next one to fire. “Practice makes permanent. The more times the network is stimulated, the stronger and more efficient it becomes.” (Willis, "Mind, Brain & Education". 2010)

Changing Brains in the Classroom 

Sharing this information with students will also have an affect on their brains - and mindset - too. Lisa Blackwell (Columbia University), along with Kali Trzesniewski and Carol Dweck (Stanford University), published a study in the journal Child Development in 2007 that found that both morale and grades took a leap when students understood that "intelligence is malleable". The students who already believed this of themselves did better in school, and also their classmates who had been taught the same concept by researchers. The results from the groups were significantly higher than those who had not been taught about neuroplasticity.

Willis had also observed that in her own middle school class, her students were more motivated to study and engage, because those students knew that they had the capability to "[build] knowledge and change their brains".

Tips for making malleable brains: (shared from Edutopia)

Practice, practice, practice. Repeating an activity, retrieving a memory, and reviewing material in a variety of ways helps build thicker, stronger, more hard-wired connections in the brain.

Put information in context. Recognizing that learning is, essentially, the formation of new or stronger neural connections, it makes sense to prioritise activities that help students tap into already-existing pathways (for instance, by integrating academic subjects or creating class projects relevant to their lives). In other words, nix the rote memorisation. "Whenever new material is presented in such a way that students see relationships between concepts", writes Willis, "they generate greater brain cell activity and achieve more successful long-term memory storage and retrieval."

Let students know that this is how the brain works. Breaking through those neuro-mythological barriers that paint intelligence as predetermined may ease students' minds and encourage them to use their brains. Willis notes, "Especially for students who believe they are 'not smart,' the realization that they can literally change their brains through study and review is empowering." 


Explore Growth Mindset The Power of Yet

According to psychologist Carol Dweck, known for her research on an individual’s implicit theory of intelligence, “In a fixed mindset, students believe their basic abilities, their intelligence, their talents, are just fixed traits. They have a certain amount and that’s that, and then their goal becomes to look smart all the time and never look dumb. 

“In a Growth Mindset students understand that their talents and abilities can be developed through effort, good teaching and persistence. They don’t necessarily think everyone’s the same or anyone can be Einstein, but they believe everyone can get smarter if they work at it.” 

In her Ted Talk, Carol mentioned that the best way to acknowledge someone’s successes or failures - or rather, in her example, children - was not to give praise for talent, gifts or for how many A’s they received, or for putting them down when their performance was unsatisfactory - but for how they took their journey. Having their effort, problem solving strategies acknowledged, and recognised as well as having their tried and failed attempts constructively guided did more to validate the mindset of “I can get there when I practice.” Dweck specifically gives it the name of praising wisely. It gives the feedback and praise more meaning for both parties, especially when that confidence is built from the basis of a growth mindset. 

Discuss and reflect
Record your answers in your prep learning journal
Research Neuroplasticity
Discuss how understanding the principles of neuroplasticity benefits people
Discuss how you might engage with the principles of neuroplasticity for your own benefit
What are some of the ways to increase your neuroplasticity
Link to a resource that you found particularly useful or engaging.
Research Growth Mindset
Discuss what it is and why it is relevant
In this exploration, did anything surprise you? Change for you?
How will you integrate growth mindset into your learning journey?
Link to a resource that you found particularly useful or engaging.

In relation to myself, 